📖 Propagating taints from Cluster API to Nodes (#12329)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/proposals/20250513-propogate-taints.md

    - [Story 2](#story-2)
    - [Story 3](#story-3)
  - [Requirements (Optional)](#requirements-optional)
    - [Functional Requirements](#functional-requirements)
      - [FR1](#fr1)
      - [FR2](#fr2)
  - [Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints](#implementation-detailsnotesconstraints)
      - [Proposed API changes](#proposed-api-changes)
  - [Security Model](#security-model)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
- [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)
- [Additional Details](#additional-details)
  - [Test Plan [optional]](#test-plan-optional)
  - [Graduation Criteria [optional]](#graduation-criteria-optional)
  - [Version Skew Strategy [optional]](#version-skew-strategy-optional)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Glossary

Refer to the [Cluster API Book Glossary](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/glossary.html).

## Summary

Users should be able to taint `Node` resources created via Cluster API using Cluster API's higher order resources such as `MachineSet`s, `MachineDeployment`s, and `MachinePool`s.

> These taints should be additive and continuously reconciled.

Reviewer: I suspect that would count as a complete node reinitialization in other comments, e.g. CCM

Do we need policy around this if we are considering separate classes of init vs continuous taints?

> These taints should be additive and continuously reconciled.

Reviewer 2: Sounds fine to me

Users of Cluster API can currently update labels and annotations and have those values propagate from their high level resources all the way down to nodes.
While this is useful, it does not provider a way to, for example, reserve a set of nodes for specific workloads.

Doing so requires allowing users to specify taints for groups of Machines within the cluster, which this proposal aims to do.

### Goals

- Taints can be defined in a MachineTemplate and any resources that reference a template, then propagate down to the resources they manage.
- Taints defined on a `Machine` will ultimately propagate to the owned `Node`.
- Taints managed by Cluster API should not interfere with taints applied by other actors.

### Non-Goals/Future Work

- Supporting taints on individual devices via [Dynamic Resource Allocation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/#device-taints-and-tolerations). This may be added in the future, but is currently out of scope.
- Supporting taints on cluster-level resources. Taints are a lower level concern, describing a subset of nodes within a given cluster, rather than cluster-wide metadata.

## Proposal

> ### User Stories

Reviewer: Yes, i think we should call out that the uninitialized taint would resolve this race and _should_ be used in cases where you need to guarantee the taints are applied before workloads are scheduled

Taints present a challenge to this, because they are defined as an "atomic" field by Kubernetes.[^1]
This means that when updating Taints on a `Node`, _all_ `Taint`s are replaced; it is not possible to add and replace individual elements like labels and annotations allow.
As a concrete example, if a node has 3 taints and some client submits a patch request with only one, the end result is one taint on the node.
It also means that Server-Side Apply ownership rules could not be applied to individual taints, which could present conflicts between controllers or users trying to modify `Taints` on the resultant `Node`.

For Cluster API to support propagating `Taint`s, it will need to implement its own mechanism for tracking what `Taint`s it owns.

##### Proposed API changes

The following changes are proposed to the Go API:

```go
type MachineSpec{
    // Taints are the node taints that Cluster API will manage.
    // This list is not necessarily complete: other Kubernetes components may add or remove other taints.
    // Only those taints defined in this list will be added or removed by Cluster API.
    // 

>     // NOTE: This list is implemented as a "granular map" type, meaning that individual elements can be managed by different owners.

Reviewer: That is listType=map, not mapType=granular

See the usptream [string implementation](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/api/core/v1/taint.go) for more details.

### Security Model

Users who can define `Taint`s that get placed on `Node`s will be able to steer workloads, possibly to malicious hosts in order to extract sensitive data.
However, users who can define Cluster API resources already have this capability - an attacker who receives the permissions to update a `MachineTemplate` could alter the definition in a similar manner.

This proposal therefore does not present any heightened security requirements than Cluster API already has.

### Risks and Mitigations

Managing the `Taint`s on `Node`s is considered a highly privileged action in Kubernetes; it even has its own top level `kubectl taint` command.
The Kubernetes scheduler uses taints rather than `Conditions` to decide when to evict workloads.
Updating these in place could then evict workloads unintentionally, or disrupt other systems that rely on taints being present.

This risk can be mitigated by ensuring Cluster API only modifies taints that it owns on nodes, as decribed in the implementaton above.

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer: The race condition example I mentioned in a previous example might also be a good argument for continuous reconciliation. I think ultimately there are different use cases for taints, and _some_ of those must go through kubelets `--register-with-taints` to be safe, in which case, they _must_ go through the bootstrap provider.

For day 2 operation, taints on Machines make sense and to have them continuously reconciled. I'm starting to believe that having two ways to manage taints is actually required and they compliment each other.

Author: You might be right. As was pointed out in the other thread, there is the CAPI uninitialized taint and possibly similar ones with the cloud provider.

In discussing this feature with Fabrizio on a call, he mentioned the ability to have `worker` and `infrastructure` groupings within a ClusterClass. These currently propagate their labels and annotations to the Machines that are created using the templates for these groups. Right now, some providers offer a way to pass taints down with their ClusterClass templates. The kubeadm provider also passes arbitrary entries to the `--register-with-taints` argument as you pointed out.

Fabrizio expressed a desire to rationalize all of these ways of specifying taints so that hopefully, there aren't multiple ways to do it within CAPI.

I also recently spoke to @elmiko who mentioned there wasn't a way to specify taints generically for his Kubemark provider.

We may want to split up the use cases as you suggest. Perhaps we have a field for node bootstrapping that will indeed be removed, and a field for "runtime" taints.

Reviewer 3: fwiw, in the kubemark case, i ended up adding a new field to the infra machine template because kubemark does not use kubeadm for initialization and i needed to pass flags to the kubemark binary. kubemark is definitely an outlier here.

##### FR2

Users should be able to remove Taints managed by Cluster API without removing taints that Cluster API does not manage.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### The `.spec.taints` field on a `Node`

Cluster API already supports propagating labels and annotations downward in its resource heirarchy.
This support is implemented such that when these fields are updated, the underlying compute resources are _not_ replaced.

Taints present a challenge to this, because they are defined as an "atomic" field by Kubernetes.[^1]
This means that when updating Taints on a `Node`, _all_ `Taint`s are replaced; it is not possible to add and replace individual elements like labels and annotations.
As a concrete example, if a Node has 3 taints and some client submits a patch request with only one, the end result is one taint on the Node.
It also means that Server-Side Apply ownership rules could not be applied to individual taints, which could present conflicts between controllers or users trying to modify `Taints` on the resultant `Node`.

For Cluster API to support propagating `Taint`s, it will need to:

- implement its own mechanism for tracking what `Taint`s it owns.

> - ensure there are no conflicts with other actors by always setting the `metadata.resourceVersion` on API calls changing the taints on a Node.

Reviewer 4: if i'm understanding the presented problem correctly, the conflict with other actors is inevitable.
setting and respecting resourceVersions sounds like a good practices, but other actors might not do it.

> - ensure there are no conflicts with other actors by always setting the `metadata.resourceVersion` on API calls changing the taints on a Node.

Reviewer 5: > I know the fields are defined differently but if I got it right, the first point will be solved by implementing  ~ the same that we did for labels and annotations? (if yes, let's mention that we implement it a similar way)

Yes, already defined further below. Adjusting here to mention that and link to below paragraph.

> I assume we only track Always taints and set Initialize only on the first Node Patch call where we remove the uninitialized taint? (we will need a way to figure out which call is the first call even if the uninitialized taint was not set by the bootstrap provider, e.g. "taint tracking" annotation doesn't exist yet)
> 
> If I see correctly we don't set the resourceVersion yet when we patch the Node for labels & annotations, but I think it should be okay to just start doing that, right? e.g.

I assume yes. But if necessary we can make it have a separate (get and) patch call for taints (although if possible we should try to not do that).

> - ensure there are no conflicts with other actors by always setting the `metadata.resourceVersion` on API calls changing the taints on a Node.

Reviewer 5: > if i'm understanding the presented problem correctly, the conflict with other actors is inevitable.
setting and respecting resourceVersions sounds like a good practices, but other actors might not do it.

It's the same fight as with labels/annotations. If two actors try to change the same they will fight each other.

#### Propagation of taints

A taint for a Node may be defined for different use-cases:

- Taint's supposed to stay on the Node to ensure only certain workload runs on such a `Node` aka. `Always`:

>   - This taint are supposed to be set on the `Node` object as long as it is defined on its parent core CAPI object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - These taints are supposed to be set on the `Node` object as long as it is defined on its parent core CAPI object.
```
nit (similar for Initialize below)

The following defines a new struct which should be used to define taints at the corresponding API types.
It replicates the upstream corev1.Taint specification and extends it by a field called `propagation`, which will define the propagation mechanism to use for the taint.
Using a type definition allows to be extensible and add additional propagation mechanisms when necessary.

```golang
// MachineTaint defines a taint equivalent to corev1.Taint, but additionally having a propagation field.
type MachineTaint struct {
  // key is the taint key to be applied to a Node.
  // +required
  Key string `json:"key"`

  // value is the taint value corresponding to the taint key.
  // +optional
  Value string `json:"value,omitempty"`

  // effect is the effect for the taint. Valid values are NoSchedule, PreferNoSchedule and NoExecute.
  // +required
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=NoSchedule;PreferNoSchedule;NoExecute
  Effect corev1.TaintEffect `json:"effect"`

  // propagation defines how this taint should be propagated to Nodes.
  // Always: The taint will be continuously reconciled. If removed from a node, it will be re-added.

>   // Initialize: The taint will be added during node initialization. If removed, it will not be re-added.

Reviewer 5: For Always: ack, remove the taint.

For initialize: I also tend towards simplicity and "forget about them".
The obvious alternative is: also remove the taint if it is still on the node (which requires also tracking OnInitialize taints)

>   // Initialize: The taint will be added during node initialization. If removed, it will not be re-added.

Reviewer 6: +1 to forget about taint to be applied on initialize
Might be an edge case, but what if a taint goes from always to initialize and vice versa?
First brainstorming
- always to initialize: stop reconciling the taint
- initialize to always: start reconciling the taint (add where it does not exist)

  // +required
  Propagation MachineTaintPropagation `json:"propagation"`
}

// MachineTaintPropagation defines when a taint should be propagated to Nodes.
// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=Always;Initialize
type MachineTaintPropagation string

const (
  // TaintPropagationAlways means the taint should be continuously reconciled and kept on the Node.
  // If removed, it will be re-added during reconciliation.
  TaintPropagationAlways MachineTaintPropagation = "Always"

  // TaintPropagationInitialize means the taint should be set once during initialization and then
  // left alone. If removed, it will not be re-added.

>   TaintPropagationInitialize MachineTaintPropagation = "Initialize"

Reviewer 4: +1 for OnInitialization

)
```

> Proper validations on the new field should ensure that no taint with a key of `node.cluster.x-k8s.io/uninitialized` is getting added, because that one is restricted to be used by CAPI and providers.

Reviewer 5: Ack, adding that. We could even be more strict and deny all which have the `node.cluster.x-k8s.io/` prefix?

Note: we could mention that: "If additional taints should be forbidden, a ValidatingAdmissionPolicy can be created to prevent setting them" and provide an example. (stable in k8s v1.30 and v1.31 will be the oldest supported k8s management cluster version for v1.12)

Open question: alternative to consider, e.g. specific struct, (negative: not as extensible):
* example
  ```golang
  type MachineTaints struct{
    Always        []corev1.Taint `json:"always,omitempty"`
    Initialization []corev1.Taint `json:"initialization,omitempty"`
  }
  ```

> * FIXME(chrischdi): if decided this should move down to alternative approaches.

Reviewer 2: Fine for me to move down. I think one array will look better than two in the YAML

This proposes to add a field array to the `MachineSpec` struct.
This implicitly leads to adding the field to the following types:

| API Type            | New field                    |
|---------------------|------------------------------|
| `Machine`           | `.spec.taints`               |
| `MachineSet`        | `.spec.template.spec.taints` |
| `MachineDeployment` | `.spec.template.spec.taints` |
| `MachinePool`       | `.spec.template.spec.taints` |

```golang

type MachineSpec struct{
  // taints are the node taints that Cluster API will manage.
  // This list is not necessarily complete: other Kubernetes components may add or remove other taints.
  // Only those taints defined in this list will be added or removed by core Cluster API controllers.
  //
  // NOTE: This list is implemented as a "map" type, meaning that individual elements can be managed by different owners.
  // As of Kubernetes 1.33, this is different from the implementation on corev1.NodeSpec, but provides a more flexible API for components building on top of Cluster API.
  // +optional
  // +listType=map
  // +listMapKey=key
  // +listMapKey=value

>   // +listMapKey=effect

Reviewer 5: That was intended. I checked again though and I think the `value` should not be part of the listMapKey.

Kubernetes does allow having the same key but different effects.

It does not allow having the same key and effect but different value.

>   // +listMapKey=effect

Reviewer 5: Note: removed the `listMapKey=value` So it now is:

```
  // +listType=map
  // +listMapKey=key
  // +listMapKey=effect
```

  Taints []MachineTaint `json:"taints,omitempty"`

  // Other fields...
}
```

##### Changes to the ClusterClass and Cluster API for topology-aware Clusters

This proposes to add the same field array to ClusterClass and the topology section of Cluster for the controlPlane and workers sections.

The following table summarizes the new fields:

| API Type       | New field                                           |
|----------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| `ClusterClass` | `spec.controlPlane.taints`                          |
|                | `spec.workers.machineDeployments[].taints`          |
|                | `spec.workers.machinePools[].taints`                |
| `Cluster`      | `spec.topology.controlPlane.taints`                 |
|                | `spec.topology.workers.machineDeployments[].taints` |
|                | `spec.topology.workers.machinePools[].taints`       |

The propagation of the fields should follow the prior art and is summarized in the following picture:

![propagation of taints across a topology Cluster](./images/propagate-taints/topology-propagation.excalidraw.png)

> As implemented for the ReadinessGates, add taints on a Cluster should lead to only adding the taints from the ClusterClass.

Reviewer 2: "only adding the taints from the Cluster"?

> 

Reviewer 5: TODO(chrischdi) have to dig into this.

> 

Reviewer 6: That's a tricky one, and it is probably two questions

Part1: Merge vs override for taints in Cluster/ClusterClass

Considering taint are sort of related to labels, my first reaction is that taint should behave like labels (and thus we should merge, not override). 

Part1: Does [] is a valid use case for CAPI taints?

Considering that there is no concept of "default taints" in CAPI, we not allow [] taints in CAPI. 
In other words, in CAPI either we have taint to apply on initialization/to always reconcile, or not.

If a user is using CAPI with CABPK, he can decide to 
- disable kubeadm default taints and have all the taints managed in CAPI
- let kubeadm to apply default taints on CP nodes and manage only other taints in CAPI
(I would choose 2, and eventually make it possible to disable default taints in the KubeadmConfig only when there is a deliberate intent to allow workloads to run on CP machines)

> 

Reviewer 2: How are taints related to labels?

> 

Reviewer 5: | CABPK | Behavior |
| :---- | :---- |
| set | Only what’s explicitly set |
| empty | No taints |
| Not set | Default control-plane taint |

| CAPI / Machine | CABPK | Result (what will CABPK do) |
| :---- | :---- | :---- |
| Set | set | A \+ B (merge/join): If key \+ effect (conflict) is the samevalue is taken from Machine |
| Not set | set | B (as today) |
| set | empty | A |
| Not set | empty | empty |
| set | Not set | A \+ default control-plane taint |
| Not set | Not set | default control-plane taint |

Future work: eventually deprecate fields in CABPK

> 

Reviewer: Do we expect taints to ever not be atomic on nodes? I suspect not, and that this will be a breaking change if it ever were to be done. We should check open discussions though.

Given that, should we also treat our taints lists as atomic to be consistent? And with that, overwrite from clusterclass to the lower level types, rather than merging?

> 

Reviewer 2: Thx! Resolving here. Let's open a new conversation if there are remaining concerns

```golang
type ControlPlaneClass struct {
  // taints are the node taints that Cluster API will manage.
  // ...
  Taints []MachineTaint `json:"taints,omitempty"`

  // Other fields...
}

type MachineDeploymentClass struct{
  // taints are the node taints that Cluster API will manage.
  // ...
  Taints []MachineTaint `json:"taints,omitempty"`

  // Other fields...
}

type MachinePoolClass struct{
  // taints are the node taints that Cluster API will manage.
  // ...
  Taints []MachineTaint `json:"taints,omitempty"`

  // Other fields...
}
```

#### Proposed contract changes

##### Changes to the bootstrap provider contract

> Document that `Initialize` taints are only added when a bootstrap provider supports the `node.cluster.x-k8s.io/uninitialized` taint.

Reviewer 2: Yup. We only have to ensure that we keep the annotation around even if the taints become empty (I don't remember how this is done today for labels/annotations). But that seems okay

The Machine and MachinePool controllers as of today already manage the lifecycle of the taint `node.cluster.x-k8s.io/uninitialized`.

These controllers should make use of that taint and add all `Initialize` taints at the same time as they remove it from a corresponding Node.
This ensures that a node ever only gets these taints added once at the time of finishing initialization of a Node.

If a Node re-registers itself and this includes having the `node.cluster.x-k8s.io/uninitialized`, the controllers also would again add the `Initialize` taints.

Also all `Always` taints should get set for the first time, before or at the time of the removal of `node.cluster.x-k8s.io/uninitialized`.

Also at this stage the controllers could check and (re-)add all taints of the `Always` type.

Note: With this change we should also add the information to the "Contract rules for BootstrapConfig" documentation, that `Initialize` taints are only added when a bootstrap provider supports  the `node.cluster.x-k8s.io/uninitialized`.

To keep track of which taints have been added by the controller, the controller also adds the annotation `cluster.x-k8s.io/taints-from-machine` to the Node.

> This follows the convention established by `cluster.x-k8s.io/labels-from-machine`.

Reviewer 4: trying to create a hypothetical scenario (which might also be a problem for labels and other propagated fields),
if a set of taints are propagated to the node by a CAPI controller, but then a third party controller changes one of the taints. now we have set of taints that a tracked as owned by CAPI according to the annotation, but would that be the accurate state of the world, given the third party controller made a change too?

Reviewer 2: As we are continuously writing the always taints it would be accurate.

We should probably block some more taints (probably entire domains like we do for labels and annotations)

Reviewer 2: > node.kubernetes.io/* is one good candidate to block?

Seems reasonable to me. @chrischdi lets add it?

Reviewer 2: I think it's correct to say that every CAPI Machine that is a control plane must have that label. Because that's how the label is defined. If someone doesn't do that then their implementation is buggy.

So accordingly having the CP label is a prereq for being allowed to set the CP taint.

Reviewer 5: Added a contract PR: #12893

And updated the proposal

Reviewer 2: Thx. All good from my side. I'll leave this conversation open in case someone else wants to comment further

The taints will be concatenated with `,` and the serialization will look like this given the 4 ways a taint can be specified:
`cluster.x-k8s.io/taints-from-machine:<key1>=<value1>:<effect1>,<key2>=<value2>:,<key3>:<effect3>,<key4>`

See the upstream [string implementation](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/api/core/v1/taint.go) for more details.

##### Changes to the Cluster topology, MachineSet and MachineDeployment controllers

The Cluster's topology controller will properly calculate and in-place propagate the new introduced taint fields down to the ControlPlane object (if it complies with the optional contract part), MachineDeployment and/or MachinePool resources.

The MachineDeployment and MachineSet controllers will watch their associated `MachineSpec` for updates to the `spec.taints` field and update their owned objects objects (MachineSet or Machine) to reflect the new values.

This should be done similar to how the existing in-place mutable fields like `ReadinessGates`, `NodeDrainTimeout`, etc. for a Machine are handled today.

> 

Reviewer 2: Can we add a short section to mention cluster-autoscaler changes? (I think there is something that needs to be done that autoscaler can use the taints, we don't have to go in details how that would be done in the autoscaler, just to highlight that there's work to be done)

I think you can just mention the `capacity.cluster-autoscaler.kubernetes.io/taints` annotation (https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/tasks/automated-machine-management/autoscaling#pre-defined-labels-and-taints-on-nodes-scaled-from-zero) and say that autoscaler would directly consume the taints field if it is set? (let's defer details like overwrite mechanism between field and annotations)

However, users who can define Cluster API resources already have this capability - an attacker who receives the permissions to update a `MachineTemplate` could alter the definition in a similar manner.

This proposal therefore does not present any heightened security requirements than Cluster API already has.

#### Migration strategy for Bootstrap providers

With the introduction of the new fields, bootstrap providers could start deprecating their equivalent fields.

For CABPK, adding a taint at a KubeadmConfigTemplate at `.spec.template.spec.joinConfiguration.nodeRegistration.taints`. is almost equivalent to adding a `Initialization` typed taint by the new API.
The only difference is that the taint does get added by the controllers after the Node joined the Cluster.

This is considered okay, because workload should not be able to be schedule workload unless the `node.cluster.x-k8s.io/uninitialized` taint was removed and the implementation should take care to have added the `Initialization` taints before or at the time removing this taint.

> 

Reviewer 5: TODO(chrischdi): have to do research

### Risks and Mitigations

Managing the `Taint`s on `Node`s is considered a highly privileged action in Kubernetes; it even has its own top level `kubectl taint` command.
The Kubernetes scheduler uses taints rather than `Conditions` to decide when to evict workloads.
Updating these in place could then evict workloads unintentionally, or disrupt other systems that rely on taints being present.

This risk can be mitigated by ensuring Cluster API only modifies taints that it owns on nodes, as decribed in the above.

> 

Reviewer 2: I don't remember which section this belongs to, can we consider feature gating this feature? This would give us some time to get more experience with this feature and make small adjustments if necessary

There is already precedent for leaving infrastructure in-place when Kubernetes-only fields are modified, and this proposal seeks to align with the established function.

## Upgrade Strategy

Taint support is a net-new field, and therefore must be optional and not affect upgrades.

## Additional Details

[^1]: It is worth noting that there has been discussion about making the taints on a Node a "map" list type and allowing for ownership of individual taints.
As of this writing, the [pull request](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/128866) and [issue](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/117142) remain open.
This proposal should be unaffected regardless of any upstream change to the handling of taints, except that using a "map" type would simplify the implementation and allow us to cooperate with other field managers.

### Test Plan [optional]

- There should be proper unit and integration test coverage when introducing the changes.
- An e2e test should validate the high-level user-experience
  - Usage of an `Initialize` and `Always` taint
  - Adding or removing an `Always` and `Initialize` taint on day 2

### Graduation Criteria [optional]

> Open question: Should we feature-gate this new field?

Reviewer 2: Yes, please.

> Considering that "not setting the fields" should be equivalent to "disabling the feature gate" seems to be good enough.

The feature gate would give us some time to get experience with this feature and make small adjustments if necessary.

I would expect us to use the feature gate to block setting the fields via webhooks and to gate the corresponding logic in controllers

Reviewer 5: Adjusted the section to mention the above points.

Reviewer 5: Also the paragraph at the end proposes a feature gate name.

    - Designating Nodes as having a particular hardware capability, such as high performance GPUs

#### Story 2

As a user, I wish to have autoscaling capabilities using Kubernets and Cluster API resources and conventions.
I would like for taints defined on a Cluster API resource representing some collection (including but not limited to Clusters, MachineSets, MachinePools, and MachineDeployments).
This is especially useful in scale-from-zero scenarios, where that autoscaling technology can reference taints on a collection to make decisions about the cloud resources available.

#### Story 3

As a user, I would like to update taint metadata on my collection resources without forcing a complete replacement of an owned resource, such as a Machine or Node.

### Requirements (Optional)

#### Functional Requirements

Functional requirements are the properties that this design should include.

##### FR1

Users should be able to define Taints on collection resources and have the taints propagate to the owned resources.
This would start at a `ClusterClass` or `Cluster` level, and ultimately be written to a `Node`.

##### FR2

> Users should be able to remove Taints managed by Cluster API without removing taints that Cluster API does not manage.

Reviewer 6: may be let's add a not that this does not apply to taints applied only onCreation

Reviewer 5: Added a note to clarify this.

For Cluster API to support propagating `Taint`s, it will need to:

- implement its own mechanism for tracking what `Taint`s it owns. This will be similar to the implementation for annotations and labels. See [Changes to the Machine and MachinePool controllers](#changes-to-the-machine-and-machinepool-controllers) for more details.
- ensure there are no conflicts with other actors by always setting the `metadata.resourceVersion` on API calls changing the taints on a Node.

#### Propagation of taints

A taint for a Node may be defined for different use-cases:

- Taints supposed to stay on the Node to ensure only certain workload runs on such a `Node` aka. `Always`:
  - These taints are supposed to be set on the `Node` object as long as it is defined on its parent core CAPI object.
  - Example: Nodes where only GPU related workload should run
  - CAPI controllers should ensure via reconciliation that such a taint gets added again in case a third party removes it.
- Taint's supposed to get added once to a Node aka. `Initialize`

>   - This taints are supposed to be set **once** on the `Node` object.

Reviewer 6: TBD when we implement, but we have to figure it out how the code can determine "once" in a re-entrant way.

Just to mention it, we can also consider to delegate adding taint on create to bootstrap providers, or a mixed solution

Using a type definition allows to be extensible and add additional propagation mechanisms when necessary.

```golang
// MachineTaint defines a taint equivalent to corev1.Taint, but additionally having a propagation field.
type MachineTaint struct {
  // key is the taint key to be applied to a Node.
  // +required
  Key string `json:"key"`

  // value is the taint value corresponding to the taint key.
  // +optional
  Value string `json:"value,omitempty"`

  // effect is the effect for the taint. Valid values are NoSchedule, PreferNoSchedule and NoExecute.
  // +required
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=NoSchedule;PreferNoSchedule;NoExecute
  Effect corev1.TaintEffect `json:"effect"`

  // propagation defines how this taint should be propagated to Nodes.
  // Always: The taint will be continuously reconciled. If removed from a node, it will be re-added.
  // OnInitialization: The taint will be added during node initialization. If removed, it will not be re-added.
  // +required
  Propagation MachineTaintPropagation `json:"propagation"`
}

// MachineTaintPropagation defines when a taint should be propagated to Nodes.

> // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=Always;Initialize

Reviewer: To match elsewhere
```suggestion
// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=Always;OnInitialization
```

type MachineTaintPropagation string

const (
  // TaintPropagationAlways means the taint should be continuously reconciled and kept on the Node.
  // If removed, it will be re-added during reconciliation.
  TaintPropagationAlways MachineTaintPropagation = "Always"

  // TaintPropagationOnInitialization means the taint should be set once during initialization and then
  // left alone. If removed, it will not be re-added.
  TaintPropagationOnInitialization MachineTaintPropagation = "OnInitialization"
)
```

> Proper validations on the new field should ensure that no taint with a key of `node.cluster.x-k8s.io/uninitialized` or `node.cluster.x-k8s.io/outdated-revision` is getting added, because that one is restricted to be used by CAPI and providers.

Reviewer 6: q: should we reserve the node.cluster.x-k8s.io "namespace" for CAPI, so we can add more CAPI taints in future without worrying of conflict with users managed taints?

Reviewer 5: That was this one:

> I was thinking about that and then I realized that for labels/annotations per default we ~ only propagate "node.cluster.x-k8s.io" (+ some other well-known domains) which would make this a weird inconsistency for taints :/

https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/12329#discussion_r2438819722

This proposes to add a field array to the `MachineSpec` struct.
This implicitly leads to adding the field to the following types:

| API Type            | New field                    |
|---------------------|------------------------------|
| `Machine`           | `.spec.taints`               |
| `MachineSet`        | `.spec.template.spec.taints` |
| `MachineDeployment` | `.spec.template.spec.taints` |
| `MachinePool`       | `.spec.template.spec.taints` |

```golang

type MachineSpec struct{
  // taints are the node taints that Cluster API will manage.
  // This list is not necessarily complete: other Kubernetes components may add or remove other taints.
  // Only those taints defined in this list will be added or removed by core Cluster API controllers.
  //
  // NOTE: This list is implemented as a "map" type, meaning that individual elements can be managed by different owners.
  // As of Kubernetes 1.33, this is different from the implementation on corev1.NodeSpec, but provides a more flexible API for components building on top of Cluster API.
  // +optional
  // +listType=map
  // +listMapKey=key
  // +listMapKey=effect

>   Taints []MachineTaint `json:"taints,omitempty"`

Reviewer: We will want to enforce some bounds on the number of taints, any thoughts on what might be an appropriate answer?

If we capped this to 64 taints for example, do we expect CAPI users to come back and ask us to increase it?

Reviewer 5: Too many taints never make sense because a pod needs to tolerate all taints to get scheduled to a node.

If there are too many taints, it may result in a user to tolerate "all kind of" taints of a given effect.
I think that would be a bad result so limiting totally makes sense 👍 

Afaik we don't limit on labels and annotations, but also the use case is different there I'd say and should not block us setting a limit here.

I'll do some research and come back to this.

This ensures that a node ever only gets these taints added once at the time of finishing initialization of a Node.

If a Node re-registers itself and this includes having the `node.cluster.x-k8s.io/uninitialized`, the controllers also would again add the `Initialize` taints.

Also all `Always` taints should get set for the first time, before or at the time of the removal of `node.cluster.x-k8s.io/uninitialized`.

Also at this stage the controllers could check and (re-)add all taints of the `Always` type.

Note: With this change we should also add the information to the "Contract rules for BootstrapConfig" documentation, that `Initialize` taints are only added when a bootstrap provider supports  the `node.cluster.x-k8s.io/uninitialized`.

To keep track of which taints have been added by the controller, the controller also adds the annotation `cluster.x-k8s.io/taints-from-machine` to the Node.
This follows the convention established by `cluster.x-k8s.io/labels-from-machine`.

The taints will be concatenated with `,` and the serialization will look like this given the 4 ways a taint can be specified:

> `cluster.x-k8s.io/taints-from-machine:<key1>=<value1>:<effect1>,<key2>=<value2>:,<key3>:<effect3>,<key4>`

Reviewer: Do we need to delineate in this whether a taint is `OnInitialization` or not?

Some examples of this might be:

- Designating Nodes as `edge` Nodes and steering locality-critical workloads only to `edge` Nodes.
- Designating Nodes as having a particular hardware capability, such as high performance GPUs

#### Story 2

As a user, I wish to have autoscaling capabilities using Kubernetes and Cluster API resources and conventions.
I would like to define taints on a Cluster API resource representing some collection (including but not limited to MachineSets, MachinePools, and MachineDeployments).
This is especially useful in scale-from-zero scenarios, where that autoscaling technology can reference taints on a collection to make decisions about the cloud resources available.

#### Story 3

As a user, I would like to update taint metadata on my collection resources without forcing a complete replacement of an owned resource, such as a Machine or Node.

#### Story 4

As a user, I want to define a taint that is applied only once so I could ensure workload is scheduled after a custom initialization process initialized the node and remove that taint.

### Requirements (Optional)

#### Functional Requirements

> Functional requirements are the properties that this design should include.

Reviewer: Is this line part of the template rather than something we want in the merged doc?

This allows the machine controller to identify an `Always` taint it:

- has added in the past which now should be removed
- has added in the past which now should not be tracked anymore (transition to `OnInitialization`)
- has added in the past which should be kept (does not require the annotation)
- has not added yet and should be added (does not require the annotation)

The taints will be concatenated with `,` and the serialization will look like this given the field keys of the `listMap`:
`cluster.x-k8s.io/taints-from-machine: "<key1>:<effect1>,<key2>:<effect2>"`

Additionally, the fact that this annotation does not exist yet should be used as signal that the controller has to add the `OnInitialization` taints.
This also means if no `Always` taints are configured on the machine, the controller should add the annotation with an empty value.
This ensures that a node ever only gets these taints added once, at the time of finishing initialization of a Node.

If a Node re-registers itself, the controller would add the `OnInitialization` taints again in addition to the `Always` taints because the tracking annotation does not exist.

> **Note:** If a bootstrap provider supports the `node.cluster.x-k8s.io/uninitialized` taint as documented in [Contract rules for BootstrapConfig](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/developer/providers/contracts/bootstrap-config#taint-nodes-at-creation), the implementation ensures that all `OnInitialization` taints are applied in the same call through which the `node.cluster.x-k8s.io/uninitialized` taint is getting removed. This prevents that workload without proper tolerations could be scheduled to the node in the time between node creation and Cluster API adding the `OnInitialization` taints.

Reviewer 2: This is not referring to something a bootstrap provider has to do. This is referring to how we implement it in the Machine controller (and we don't have a contract for that one :)). Maybe should make that clearer though :)

> ---

Reviewer 2: Opened a PR here for some minor findings & fixes: https://github.com/nrb/cluster-api/pull/1

Reviewer 5: merged in

## Summary

This proposal introduces taints as a first-class citizen in Cluster API's core types, enabling users to declaratively manage Node taints through higher-level Cluster API resources such as Cluster, ClusterClass, MachineSet, MachineDeployment and MachinePool.

The proposal defines two different kind of propagation modes for taints:

- **Always**: Taints are continuously reconciled and maintained on nodes
- **OnInitialization**: Taints are set once during node initialization and then left unmanaged

**Note:** This new proposal has been created rather than updating the prior [in-place metadata propagation](20221003-In-place-propagation-of-Kubernetes-objects-only-changes.md) proposal because taints are not yet part of the Core Provider's API types and are different enough from labels or annotations that a different set of constraints will need to be considered.
Very early versions of Kubernetes tracked taints as annotations, but they have long since been [promoted to their own API type](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/commit/9b640838a5f5e28db1c1f084afa393fa0b6d1166)

## Motivation

> As stated in the goals of the project, Cluster API tries to "define common operations" and "manage the lifecycle [...] of Kubernetes-conformant Clusters using a declarative API"

Reviewer 2: nit: I think [...] doesn't work as a link. At least not on GitHub: https://github.com/nrb/cluster-api/blob/taints-propagation-proposal/docs/proposals/20250513-propogate-taints.md

Reviewer 2: Lol. My bad. I thought [...] was also supposed to be a link 😂
